---
layout: post
title:  "Talks (доклады)"
date:   2021-06-01 13:57:56 +0300
categories: teaching
---

This is a list of talks I prepared during last years.

In english:

* "Typed embedding of a relational language in OCaml" (ML Workshop 2016) [on youtube][ocanren-2016]

In russian during seminar of our lab :

* Parsley (2021)
* "Pattern mathcing compilation via relational programming" (2020)
* "Retrofitting parallelism onto OCaml" (2020)
* delimCC (2019)
* Yoneda lemma (2019)
* Register allocation via puzzle solving (2019)
* copattern mathcing (2018)

In russian:

* About "Relational programming in OCaml" (during PLC2017 conference, Rostov-on-don, Russia)
* About ocsigen on IT Meetup 2018
* "Pure functional data structures" (for students in 2019)
* "Pure functional data structures" (for students in 2020)



You’ll find this post in your `_posts` directory. Go ahead and edit it and re-build the site to see your changes. You can rebuild the site in many different ways, but the most common way is to run `jekyll serve`, which launches a web server and auto-regenerates your site when a file is updated.

To add new posts, simply add a file in the `_posts` directory that follows the convention `YYYY-MM-DD-name-of-post.ext` and includes the necessary front matter. Take a look at the source for this post to get an idea about how it works.

Jekyll also offers powerful support for code snippets:

{% highlight ruby %}
def print_hi(name)
  puts "Hi, #{name}"
end
print_hi('Tom')
#=> prints 'Hi, Tom' to STDOUT.
{% endhighlight %}

Check out the [Jekyll docs][jekyll-docs] for more info on how to get the most out of Jekyll. File all bugs/feature requests at [Jekyll’s GitHub repo][jekyll-gh]. If you have questions, you can ask them on [Jekyll Talk][jekyll-talk].

[jekyll-docs]: https://jekyllrb.com/docs/home
[jekyll-gh]:   https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll
[jekyll-talk]: https://talk.jekyllrb.com/
[ocanren-2016]: https://youtu.be/tZm4b14_tZs?list=PLnqUlCo055hX_BCFl3kLW1bB9Mp4wZACc
